Add localizing cht initial commit (#585)
medic/cht-docs: content/en/apps/tutorials/localizing-cht.md

- Change outgoing texts to another language: Swahili in our case.
{{% /pageinfo %}}

## Brief Overview of Key Concepts

*Localization* this is  setting up the desired language in CHT for the end user.

*Translations* this is manually setting up extra translations of instance tabs texts or outgoing SMS text. See an outline of how to do that [here](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/apps/reference/translations/#translations).

## Required Resources

You should have a functioning [CHT instance with `cht-conf` installed locally]({{< ref "apps/tutorials/local-setup" >}}), completed a [project folder]({{< ref "apps/tutorials/local-setup#3-create-and-upload-a-blank-project" >}}) setup, and an [messages-sw.properties]({{< ref "apps/reference/translations" >}}) file.

## Implementation Steps

Create a new file in the 'translations/' folder called messages-sw.properties

1. Localize CHT Elements to Swahili
_**CHT Instance text**_ - for non-admin users, this is the text that falls under **Messages**, **Tasks**, **Reports**, **People** and **Targets**.
To localize instance text to Swahili, change the default system language to `Swahili`.

> ![configuration](change-system-language.png)

Reviewer: Consider adding step by step screenshots that correspond to the text instructions.

> Use the instructions outlined [here](https://docs.communityhealthtoolkit.org/apps/reference/translations/#translations) to  change the instance language.

Reviewer: Tutorials should be prescriptive. As such a user would only need to follow the instructions to achieve the intended outcome. From you are instructions, you've mostly highlighted what to change but not how to effect it. e.g which cht-conf command do you run?

e.g to change the date of birth field to Swahili, in `messages-sw.properties` file, add this:

```
contact.type.date_of_birth = Siku ya Kuzaliwa
```
![configuration](localize-reports.png)

e.g 

_**People**_
To localize the contact labels, add the appropriate translation in `messages-{language-code}.properties` file.

e.g to change the chv name field to Swahili, in `messages-sw.properties` file, add this:

```
contact.type.district_hospital = Kituo Cha Afya
```

_**Targets**_
You can localize the names of the targets by adding the appropriate translation in the `messages-{language-code}.properties file.

e.g to change the `Number of fever cases managed` target to Swahili on the instance, adding the appropriate translation in the `messages-sw.properties` file. i.e

```
targets.fever_cases_managed.title = Idadi ya kesi za homa kusimamiwa
```

#### 2. App Forms
To localize an app form to say the Kiswahili language, open the appropriate xlsx of the form and add a `label::sw` column which has the translation for the text. This will work in the `Survey` sheet or the `choices` sheet.

> ![configuration](app-forms-localization.png)

Reviewer: Let's also show the two form renderings from the app

Author: It's `label::sw`. Not sure what the question is referring to here since neither `label::id` nor `label::en` is in the doc.

Reviewer: label::id is indonesian. so it's OK. I'd lost that context

_**App Management - Admin Area**_

> This will still remain in English even after changing the default language.

Reviewer: This defaults to english and is unaffected by any locale change.

Could you please confirm if this is a bug or is by design?

Author: This is consistent across versions and is therefore by design.

Reviewer: Could you please open a cht-core issue? I'm assuming if folks want the app in french, then the whole app should be in french (including admin)

**Note**: The CHV can also choose the language of their choice when they login for the first time. A popup appears where they can choose their preferred language. 
### 3. Outgoing Texts

These are the SMS notifications/replies that go to CHVs and Supervisors phones in projects that incorporate SMS workflows.

To change the language of outgoing texts to a particular CHV/Supervisor to Swahili: 

> i). First in app settings, when configuring replies, add Swahili(sw) under `locales`. Like so:

Reviewer: app settings => app_settings.json

Reviewer 2: base_settings.json

```
"locales": [
    {
      "code": "en",
      "name": "English"
    },
    {
      "code": "es",
      "name": "Spanish"
    },
    {
      "code": "fr",
      "name": "French"
    },
    {
      "code": "ne",
      "name": "Nepali"
    },
    {
      "code": "sw",
      "name": "Swahili"
    }
``` 

ii) Set up the translation for the reply message. For example:
```
"messages": [
        {
          "message": [
            {
              "content": "Thank you, visit for {{patient_name}} ({{patient_id}}) has been recorded.",
              "locale": "en"
            },
            {
              "content": "Asante, kuhudhuria kwa {{patient_name}} ({{patient_id}} kumerekodiwa.",
              "locale": "sw"
            }
          ],
          "event_type": "report_accepted",
          "recipient": "reporting_unit"
        },
``` 
iii) Change the CHVs language in app management > users > [Choose CHV username e.g chv_1] > Language 

![configuration](change-user-language.png)

> ### Translating CHT to another language

Reviewer: Is there a plan to add steps to translate targets?

Author: https://github.com/medic/cht-docs/blob/31a32b05f75020c2686b18dc7a2a8f5f90db5b1b/content/en/apps/tutorials/localizing-cht.md?plain=1#L101

```
cht --url=https://medic:password@localhost --upload-custom-translations
```

### 1. Localize CHT Elements to Swahili
_**CHT Instance text**_ - for non-admin users, this is the text that falls under **Messages**, **Tasks**, **Reports**, **People** and **Targets**.
To localize instance text to Swahili, change the default system language to `Swahili`.

Go to App Management > Display > Languages > Default Language(Change to Swahili)

![configuration](change-system-language.png)

Create a `message-sw.properties` file and use the instructions outlined [here]({{< ref "../reference/translations/#translations" >}}) to learn the structure of a message-{language-code}.properties file.

After creating a `messages-sw.properties` file, to upload the initial draft or after any changes, use the below command to upload to your local CHT instance:

```
cht --local upload-custom-translations
```
The default Swahili translations that come pre-added to CHT can be found [here](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/blob/master/ddocs/medic/_attachments/translations/messages-sw.properties).

After changing the instance language to Swahili, the various elements will behave like this:

_**Messages**_

> In Messages, the time counter text and text that shows the user how to navigate the tab changes.

Author: I have highlighted the changes in the image.

By the end of the tutorial you should be able to:

- Change the CHT instance text to Swahili.
- Change outgoing texts to Swahili.
{{% /pageinfo %}}

## Brief Overview of Key Concepts

*Localization* this is  setting up the desired language in CHT for the end user.

*Translations* this is manually setting up extra translations of instance tabs texts or outgoing SMS text. See an outline of how to do that [here]({{< ref "../reference/translations/#translations" >}}).

## Required Resources

You should have a functioning [CHT instance with `cht-conf` installed locally]({{< ref "apps/tutorials/local-setup" >}}), completed a [project folder]({{< ref "apps/tutorials/local-setup#3-create-and-upload-a-blank-project" >}}) setup, and an [messages-sw.properties]({{< ref "../reference/translations" >}}) file.

## Implementation Steps

Create a new file in the 'translations/' folder called `messages-sw.properties`.

After an edit or addition of a translation, upload the current `messages-sw.properties` onto your local environment using the below command.

```
cht --url=https://medic:password@localhost --upload-custom-translations
```

> ### 1. Localize CHT Elements to Swahili

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### 1. Add User Interface Label Translations
```
Make the heading a little more descriptive.

To localize instance text to Swahili, change the default system language to `Swahili`.

Go to App Management > Display > Languages > Default Language(Change to Swahili)

![configuration](change-system-language.png)

Create a `message-sw.properties` file and use the instructions outlined [here]({{< ref "../reference/translations/#translations" >}}) to learn the structure of a message-{language-code}.properties file.

Populate the `messages-sw.properties` file with the appropriate translation strigs and upload it using the below command:

```
cht --local upload-custom-translations
```
The default Swahili translations that come pre-added to CHT can be found [here](https://github.com/medic/cht-core/blob/master/ddocs/medic/_attachments/translations/messages-sw.properties).

After changing the instance language to Swahili, the various elements will behave like this:

_**Messages**_

In Messages, the time counter text and navigation text changes.

See below example for Swahili localization.

*English text*

![configuration](messages-tab-language-en.png)

*Swahili Translation*

![configuration](messages-tab-language-sw.png)

_**Tasks**_

> You can localize the task header by adding the appropriate translation in the `messages-sw.properties` file.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Localize the task header by adding the appropriate translation in the `messages-sw.properties` file.
```

> e.g to translate the below delivery task title to Swahili

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, to translate the below delivery task title to Swahili:
```

```
{
    name: 'anc-home-visit-delivery',
    icon: 'icon-pregnancy',
    title: 'task.anc.delivery.title',
``` 

> Add the below code to the `messages-sw.properties` file

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Add the code below to the `messages-sw.properties` file
```

```
task.anc.delivery.title = Kazi ya Kujifungua
```

*Default English  text*

![configuration](localize-tasks-en.png)

*Swahili translation*
![configuration](localize-tasks-sw.png)

_**Reports**_

> You can localize the report field names by adding the appropriate translation in the `messages-{language-code}.properties` file.
> 
> e.g to change the date of birth field to Swahili, in `messages-sw.properties` file, add this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Localize the report field names by adding the appropriate translation in the `messages-{language-code}.properties` file.

For example, to change the date of birth field to Swahili, in `messages-sw.properties` file, add this:
```

```
contact.type.date_of_birth = Siku ya Kuzaliwa
```
*Before*

![configuration](localize-reports-en.png)

*Swahili Translation*

![configuration](localize-reports-sw.png)

e.g 

_**People**_

To localize the contact labels, add the appropriate translation in `messages-{language-code}.properties` file.

e.g to change the people name label translation from the default Swahili translation of `Watu` to `Watu wa hili hapa eneo`, in `messages-sw.properties` file, add this:

```
contact.type.person = Mtu wa hili hapa eneo
contact.type.person.plural = Watu wa hili hapa eneo
```

*Before*

![configuration](people-translation-en.png)

*After

![configuration](people-translation-sw.png)

_**Targets**_

You can localize the names of the targets by adding the appropriate translation in the `messages-{language-code}.properties file.

> e.g to add the `Growth Monitoring` target title in Swahili on the instance, add the appropriate translation in the `messages-sw.properties` file. i.e

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, to add the `Growth Monitoring` target title in Swahili on the instance, add the appropriate translation in the `messages-sw.properties` file. For instance:
```
Avoid abbreviations whenever you can. Use for example instead of e.g., and for instance instead of i.e.

```
targets.growth_monitoring.title = Ufuatiliaji wa ukuaji
```
*Before adding the Swahili target label*

![configuration](growth-monitoring-before.png)

*After adding the Swahili target label*

![configuration](growth-monitoring-after.png)

> #### 2. App Forms

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### 2. App Forms
```

To localize an app form to Swahili, open the appropriate xlsx of the form and add a `label::sw` column which has the translation for the text. This will work in the `Survey` sheet or the `choices` sheet.

*New Person app form XLS configuration*
![configuration](new-person-xls-form.png)

*Screenshot of default English translation*

![configuration](new-person-form-english.png)

*Screenshot of form after switching CHV language to Kiswahili*

![configuration](new-person-form-swahili.png)

_**App Management - Admin Area**_
This will still remain in English even after changing the default language to Swahili.

> **Note**: The CHV can also choose the language of their choice when they login for the first time. A popup appears where they can choose their preferred language. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
{{% alert title="Note" %}}The CHV can also choose the language of their choice when they login for the first time. A popup appears where they can choose their preferred language.{{% /alert %}}
```
Use alert tags for notes and content you want to highlight.

### 3. Outgoing Texts

These are the SMS notifications/replies that go to CHVs and Supervisors phones in projects that incorporate SMS workflows.

To change the language of outgoing texts to a particular CHV/Supervisor to Swahili: 

> i). First in the `app_settings.json`, when configuring replies, add Swahili(sw) under `locales`. Like so:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First in the `app_settings.json`, when configuring replies, add Swahili(sw) under `locales`:
```

```
"locales": [
    {
      "code": "en",
      "name": "English"
    },
    {
      "code": "es",
      "name": "Spanish"
    },
    {
      "code": "fr",
      "name": "French"
    },
    {
      "code": "ne",
      "name": "Nepali"
    },
    {
      "code": "sw",
      "name": "Swahili"
    }
``` 

> ii) Set up the translation for the reply message. For example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Set up the translation for the reply message:
```

```
"messages": [
        {
          "message": [
            {
              "content": "Thank you, visit for {{patient_name}} ({{patient_id}}) has been recorded.",
              "locale": "en"
            },
            {
              "content": "Asante, kuhudhuria kwa {{patient_name}} ({{patient_id}} kumerekodiwa.",
              "locale": "sw"
            }
          ],
          "event_type": "report_accepted",
          "recipient": "reporting_unit"
        },
``` 

> iii) Change the CHVs language in app management > users > [Choose CHV username e.g chv_1] > Language > Pick Swahili 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Change the CHVs language in app management > users > [Choose CHV username e.g chv_1] > Language > Pick Swahili:
```

---
title: "CHT Localization/"

> linkTitle: "Localizing CHT"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
linkTitle: "Localization"
```

![configuration](new-person-form-english.png)

*Screenshot of form after switching CHV language to Kiswahili*

![configuration](new-person-form-swahili.png)

_**App Management - Admin Area**_
This will still remain in English even after changing the default language to Swahili.

{{% alert title="Note" %}}The CHV can also choose the language of their choice when they login for the first time. A popup appears where they can choose their preferred language.
{{% /alert %}} 
### 3. Outgoing Texts

These are the SMS notifications/replies that go to CHVs and Supervisors phones in projects that incorporate SMS workflows.

To change the language of outgoing texts to a particular CHV/Supervisor to Swahili: 

First in the `app_settings.json`, when configuring replies, add Swahili(sw) under `locales`:
```
"locales": [
    {
      "code": "en",
      "name": "English"
    },
    {
      "code": "es",
      "name": "Spanish"
    },
    {
      "code": "fr",
      "name": "French"
    },
    {
      "code": "ne",
      "name": "Nepali"
    },
    {
      "code": "sw",
      "name": "Swahili"
    }
``` 

Set up the translation for the reply message:
```
"messages": [
        {

>           "message": [

Reviewer: indentation is off
